[feat][site] PIP-264 Add OpenTelemetry metrics instructions (#841)
apache/pulsar-site: docs/deploy-monitoring-opentelemetry.md

> ---

Reviewer: <img width="337" alt="image" src="https://github.com/apache/pulsar-site/assets/989425/eb728cb5-ed83-4b35-9508-45ed8af2f35b">

Maybe this should be placed inside Monitoring?

Reviewer: then from reference of `OpenTelemetry Monitoring` link to OpenTelemetry section in Monitoring?

id: deploy-monitoring-opentelemetry
title: OpenTelemetry Monitoring
sidebar_label: "OpenTelemetry Monitoring"
---

# Status
Pulsar emits OpenTelemetry metrics starting from version 3.3.0. OpenTelemetry support is currently **experimental** and
complements the pre-existing Prometheus metric system, with the goal of eventually replacing it. The metrics it exposes
are semantically equivalent to the Prometheus metrics.

# Scope
Pulsar OpenTelemetry metrics are currently available for the broker only. Support for the proxy and function worker is
planned for a future release.

# OpenTelemetry Configuration
Pulsar use the auto-configuration [extension](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/blob/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure/README.md)
of OpenTelemetry to manage the SDK configuration. The extension allows parameter input from environment variables and
Java system properties. The instructions below rely on environment variables, but can be adapted to use system
properties too. These variables must be exposed to the Pulsar process via the respective deployment method.

> Note that the experimental file based configuration is not currently supported by Pulsar.

Author: I meant to say it's not _supported_ only. It might very well work, but it's an experimental feature that we haven't validated against our setup.

> Note that the experimental file based configuration is not currently supported by Pulsar.

Reviewer: It won't work per the reasons I wrote, and also I believe you need to include another JAR for it.

> Note that the experimental file based configuration is not currently supported by Pulsar.

Author: Added hyperlink. We can add a note of support when we implement it. I don't think we need to mention roadmap items in this document, especially since they are not a priority as of now. What do you think?

## Telemetry Enablement

> The OpenTelemetry pipeline is disabled by default. Set environment variable `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false` to allow the

Author: There's a note in the previous section that clarifies that env variables and system properties both work, but that the document uses env variables for brevity.

> The OpenTelemetry pipeline is disabled by default. Set environment variable `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false` to allow the

Author: How about the following:

```suggestion
The experimental OpenTelemetry feature is explicitly disabled by default in Pulsar. Set environment variable `OTEL_SDK_DISABLED=false` to allow the
```

## Resource Attributes Configuration

Pulsar automatically sets the following resource attributes:

| Attribute         | Description                                                                       |
|-------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `pulsar.cluster`  | The name of the Pulsar cluster.                                                   |
| `service.name`    | The name of the Pulsar service. For the broker, this defaults to `pulsar-broker`. |
| `service.version` | The version of the Pulsar service.                                                |

Any of these attributes can be overriden by means of environment variable `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`:

```shell
OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=pulsar.cluster=my-cluster,service.name=my-broker,service.version=1.0.0
```

Additional runtime resource attributes, such as hostname, process ID, or operating system, are automatically inferred by
the SDK. For a description of these attributes, refer to the respective [documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/resources/library).

> For further details on configuring resource attributes, refer to the SDK [documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java/tree/main/sdk-extensions/autoconfigure#opentelemetry-resource-attributes).

Author: IMO "configuring" is a better choice here. The user can both add new resource attributes, but also modify the ones that Pulsar itself overrides.
